good evening ladies and gentlemen the
philosophers that we looked at last week
although they were extremely influential
on all later philosophy did not have
complete systems of philosophy to offer
they had leads individual ideas
particular observations and arguments
and of course these were accepted by
many later philosophers but these early
pre-socratics had no definitive
systematic all-embracing approaches to
philosophy that they had yet worked out
tonight we're going to look at the first
actually developed worked out systematic
approaches to philosophy their first
attempts at complete systems or at least
overall approaches to philosophy we're
going to look at three kinds of
philosophy that were formulated in
Greece and endure to this day with
legions of supporters right to the
present all around you although
presumably not in this room the three
kinds are materialism skepticism
idealism and I'll say a word at the
outset defining each of these three
basic approaches materialism is a
technical term in metaphysics it does
not mean a preoccupation with money or
sex it is the view that reality is
basically matter in motion and it also
called non material or mental phenomena
are to be explained entirely in physical
material terms skepticism is the view
that no objective or certain knowledge
of anything by anyone is possible in
other words that what we call knowledge
is really a guess a hunch a subjective
feeling a probability or whatever you
wish to call it but not true knowledge
idealism again is a technical term in
philosophy it does not mean devotion to
the good it is the view again from
metaphysics that reality is basically
non material and that the material world
is not an irreducible primary but
actually simply a byproduct or
expression of some
the more fundamental something which is
non-material in character
now I note for the record that these are
not the only possible approaches to
philosophy these three Aristotle has no
one of them and neither is objectivism
but of that we'll say more later now all
of these three that we're going to look
at tonight are derivatives in various
ways of various of the early
philosophers that we looked at last week
in a way you could say that materialism
is implied by Bailey's view that
everything is water since water is a
form of matter
although theories is too early to have
grasped or stated the materialist
implications of his statement and is
highly doubtful that he would have
accepted materialism if he had realized
that it wasn't tailed in his statement
material isms major Greek spokesmen are
the atomists and that's the first school
we'll look at tonight skepticism is
primarily a derivative of Heraclitus you
remember his disciple cratylus who
stopped speaking all together on the
grounds there was nothing to refer to
and its major exponent R is the softest
school they are the last pre platonic
school I don't call them any longer
pre-socratic because they are
contemporary with Socrates in the fifth
century BC and idealism in Greece is a
derivative essentially of the
Pythagorean viewpoint with a large boost
or assist from Parmenides and Heraclitus
and its major exponent of course is
Plato helped along by certain
suggestions of Socrates now of these
three movements I should say at the
outset the idealism of Plato was
incomparably more influential in the
ancient world in the medieval world in
the modern world in the 20th century
then either materialism or skepticism
alone or in combination have ever been
in fact one of the great attractions
that Plato offered his followers and
does till this day was that his approach
to philosophy in abil them to escape the
materialist or the skeptic approaches so
we are going to look comparatively
briefly first
materialism and skepticism as general
background and then begin on Plato
and now let's then turn first to the
materialists the atomists as they were
called in Greece for a reason we'll see
in a moment we saw last week the problem
raised by the opposition of Heraclitus
and Parmenides everything has changed
and that's all it exists there is no
change only the motionless one and we
saw the pythagoreans attempt to solve
the problem by postulating two worlds
one which is constant flux this one and
that should satisfy Heraclitus in their
view and one which is immutable and that
should satisfy Parmenides so there was
an attempt to reconcile these two views
now the atomists are the outcome of a
very different kind of attempt also to
reconcile Parmenides and Herrick lakes
in other words a very different attempt
from the pythagoreans the atom has
belonged to a general approach which is
called pluralism plu are al pluralism
and the name I'll explain in a moment
the pluralist were a group of
philosophers who agreed with elements of
Parmenides and elements of Heraclitus as
follows they agreed with Parmenides that
the stuff that makes up reality has to
be uncreated indestructible eternal
unchanging they agreed absolutely there
can be no what is becoming what is not
or vice-versa
there is no what is not or to put it
another way they agreed that nothing
really new can ever come into or go out
of existence but they agreed with
Heraclitus that there is such a thing as
change process action motion becoming
and they regarded this as simply too
obvious of fact to deny the question was
how will we reconcile these two views
and they got this idea they said what if
we abandon monism now monism remember
was the view I introduced the term last
week it is the view that there was only
one world stuff that everything for
instance is water or air or whatever it
happens to be suppose we abandon that
view and say in
said that there are many different
stuffs which make up the world and of
course the name pluralism will come from
the idea of many stuffs let us they said
to themselves endow each of these stuffs
by itself with all aparment idiom
characteristics so that in itself each
of them is unchanging eternal
indestructible like a little miniature
parma Nadeem universe but they said the
one thing will allow these stuffs is to
move around in space
that's all will allow them to change
their position will allow locomotion
locomotion as the only type of change
permitted now we will not therefore
allow any internal alteration in the
stuffs no change in their individual
qualities and they argue locomotion
doesn't violate Parmenides principle
because it doesn't require anything new
to come into existence or to go out of
existence
locomotion involves simply a
rearrangement of the stuffs that always
exist in new combinations a constant
mixing and unmixing as they put it of
the stuffs in different arrangements so
we will never have a case of what is
becoming what is not or vice-versa
we are gonna then explain every other
kind of change exclusively as being
actually in reality a process of
changing position and therefore changing
rearrangements of these unchanging
stuffs if you want to think of it this
way will take Parmenides 1 and smash it
into a bunch of separate little stuffs
and we will explain all change growth
becoming development as merely a process
in which these eternal stuffs constantly
shift around they rearrange themselves
so we won't need any reference to
non-existence as the beginning or the
end of the process of change and the key
point will be nothing new ever comes
into existence
well of course the question was what are
these many stuffs now the early
pluralists are primarily of historical
interest the first advocate of this
approach was a man called empedocles e/m
PE d OC le s who is 490 to 435 bc and he
was not very original in his concept of
what the stuffs were he just picked up
the various stuffs of his predecessors
and combined them into one view so he
said there were four basic kinds of
stuff four routes as he called it earth
air water and fire and everything else
was merely combinations and
rearrangements of these four so much for
him pedak Li's I mean he had a clever
idea but it's not worth spending time on
yours now he had a successor and Aksai
giris and ex AG or s who is born around
500 BC who disagreed with him also a
pluralist but he argued as follows he
said to impetus in effect you say there
is supposed to be nothing new coming
into existence you say that on your
philosophy you never have what is not
becoming what is but I don't see it as
far as I can tell on your viewpoint you
are violating Parmenides basic principle
all the time consider for instance
tomatoes or bananas or tobacco or chalk
or flesh or a hair and so on now you say
that these things are formed when earth
air and so on get into different
combinations but even so all these
things I mentioned are different from
earth air water and fire
they have different qualities they have
different tastes and different colors
and different sounds of different odors
so something new is actually coming into
existence when various changes take
place banana taste comes into existence
and then when the banana disintegrates
it goes out of existence and so on he
said we have to really be consistent
here if there are truly to be no new
qualities in real
and that's the basic par manatee in
principle there has to be way more than
four stuffs there has to be an
indefinite number of stuffs there have
to be as many different stuffs as there
are different types of things there has
to be tomato stuff with its distinctive
qualities and banana stuff flesh stuff
hair stuff tobacco stuff etc etc when
each of these will have to be regarded
as irreducible inexplicable in terms of
anything else a basic ingredient of
reality now we said if we take this view
and we say little tiny bits of all of
these stuffs are actually in everything
little seeds as he put it okay of all
you might say well but I don't see
bananas stuff and tomato stuff when I
look at somebody's here and of course
the answer would be only little seeds
are there and your senses are too gross
to detect them your senses deceive you
you only see the dominant stuff but
suppose that a little bit's little seeds
were of everything was in everything
then he says change would really only be
a rearrangement and nothing new whatever
come into existence if we burn the wood
for instance and converted it to ash
well there wouldn't be new qualities
coming into existence because the ash
stuff was always in the wood to begin
with and all that happened is a certain
rearrangement made us able to perceive
the ash stuff and temporarily obscured
the wood stuff which is still there and
so on for all changes this he said is
the only thing to do if we're to obey
Parmenides principle on the other hand
this was a total dead end from the tasks
undertaken by failures it was the total
collapse because they Lee's wanted to
find unity in the midst of diversity he
wanted to find the one in the many and
here we end up with diversity with the
many as absolutely irreducible and
inexplicable it's a hopeless theory
which would be the end of science all
you can say about Tomatoes is they're
made of tomato stuff and so on for
everything you know and yet it seemed to
follow from empirical ease if you're
going to because
with Parmenides at this point the
atomists entered the scene now the two
famous atom estar Leucippus le UCI PP us
who lived some time in the 6th century
BC and almost nothing is known of him
and therefore the much more famous one
is Democritus de mo CRI tus who as far
as we can tell lived a whole century
from 460 to 360 BC now they were also
pluralists these two they had in the
school they agreed that the world was
composed of many elements each of them
by itself too tiny to see and that all
change was merely the mixing and I'm
mixing the rearranging of these elements
but they said and exactly as his theory
is hopeless what can we do to get out of
it well they came up with the theory
which was destined to be antastic li
influential they said we have to
distinguish two kinds of characteristics
which physical things possess two
basically different kinds of
characteristics the qualities and the
quantities the qualitative
characteristics versus the quantitative
or mathematical or numerical
characteristics now in the qualities
were included things like colors red
orange yellow etc sounds loud soft
etcetera odors you can think of examples
tastes temperatures warm cold etc
texture rough smooth etcetera
those are the qualities in the
quantities are the attributes which are
mathematically measurable and here you
see an obvious influence of the
pythagoreans and they include size the
exact amount of extension of a given
particle shape is it triangular
rectangular or what motion or arrest and
at what rate is it standing still or is
it moving and if so at what rate and
number is a thing one particle or is
there ten particles making up a peach or
whatever those are the big four of the
quantity size shape state of motion and
number now on the basis of this
distinction they said there is only one
way out of an exact yours is dilemma and
that is to strip qualities from the
things in the world altogether to say
that the things in the physical world
actually only have quantitative
characteristics actually only have size
shape motion and number because they say
if you say that qualities as they have
just defined it if you say that
qualities like colors odors taste
temperatures and so on are real then
you've got two choices and it's disaster
either direction either you have to say
some of them are real but not all and
that's in principle the position
of empedocles some qualities are real
and not the rest but then the others
emerge come into existence and go out of
existence and that's forbidden by
Parmenides or else you have to say all
qualities are real all are equally basic
and eternal and that's an exact yours
position which is hopeless
well our only alternative if we're to
escape the disasters implicit in saying
some qualities are real or all qualities
are real is to say no qualities are real
we will say that reality in itself is
exclusively quantitative the various
stuffs that make it up in themselves
have only size shape motion number what
we call qualities are simply the way
that what's really out there effects us
merely they are merely the subjective
effects on human beings merely the way
things appear to us and if we take that
view they said we will be able to
explain change without violating
Parmenides when wood becomes ash no new
qualities are taking place in reality
because in reality there aren't any
qualities at all the appearance of new
qualities is simply taking place in our
minds as a result of different
rearrangements of purely quantitative
particles out there in the world
therefore reality consists of a huge
actually infinite number of tiny stuffs
or particles possessing only these
quantitative features now why will we
call them these particles well each of
them is absolutely parm an idiot it's a
little tiny Parmenides and one it's
absolutely solidly packed with any given
particle it's a plane um if you remember
that term completely full there's no
little holes in it so if you try to get
the point of a knife or even a needle
into one of these particles you couldn't
do it couldn't solidly packed it's
completely uncuttable and since the
Greek for uncuttable is at Tomei it came
out that these little
because our atoms and therefore they
took the view that all changes nothing
but spatial change of atomic position
and thus the name atomists which has now
supersedes pluralism because they all
pluralist just fell into disrepute this
became the sophisticated form of
pluralism now the question comes how do
you differentiate one atom from another
since there all have no qualities at all
what makes one atom one atom and
separates it from another and the answer
was well there must be empty space
between them because if there was no
empty space it was it was all one
solidly packed mash of atoms then it
would be the same as one big atom in
other words we'd be back to Parmenides 1
therefore over and above atoms there has
to be the empty spaces between and
therefore they said there are two
constituents that make up reality atoms
and as they called it the void the void
being the empty spaces which separate
the atoms now of course the void is a
crude violation of Parmenides principle
it's a blatant what is not sitting out
there as a constituent of reality they
tried to get around it by saying oh no
it isn't a violation of permittees it's
just that there's two kinds of reality
full reality and empty reality but
that's a pretty crummy
way out in any event the universe has
atoms and the void and that's all
now how do these atoms operate what
determines how they behave and their
answer was they operate exclusively as a
result of physical pressure and impact
from other atoms and their physical
reaction accordingly they smash each
other and collide strictly according to
the laws of mechanics of course they
didn't know the laws of mechanics in
those days but what we would now call
the laws of mechanics and these are
sometimes referred to as the billiard
ball metaphysics if you imagine a person
has shot the the balls broken them up
and they are now just combing back and
forth smashing each other and moving
back and forth strictly by mechanistic
law well according to the atomists
everything operates that way everything
that happens happens exclusively
according to the laws of mechanics which
means first of all nothing ever happens
by chance they were opposed all together
to the idea that something causeless
could happen everything is determined by
the atomic configurations and the
various pressures and reactions by
mechanical look it means secondly they
said that nothing ever happens for a
purpose or an end or a goal because
atoms or billiard balls if you want to
think of that analogy do not move around
in order to get into the side pocket
they move around simply as a result of
the forces operating upon them now there
were the laws of mechanics they have no
purposes no goals now you may be tempted
to think well billiard balls move that
way but the man who wields the cue was
motivated by a different principle of
behavior he had a purpose whether it's
to enjoy himself or show off his skill
or make money or past the time whatever
it happens to be but you see if you are
an atomist
and you subscribe to this philosophy you
say the man wielding the cue operates on
exactly the principle of the billiard
balls do once he's hit them he also has
a quivering system of atoms
certain atoms struck him in the
appropriate places and that caused parts
of his body to start quivering and that
caused him to pick up the cue and that
caused
and so on so and at a certain point the
motion is communicated that the balls
would start to jostle back and forth and
then they'd hit the table and others
jostle and so on and so on and so on and
that's it now I'm metaphysics such as
this is called technically mechanistic
materialism now each of those words has
a meaning materialism I've already
defined as the view that matter is the
fundamental reality and that anything
non material is simply a derivative or
by product to be explained entirely in
physical terms mechanism is the view
that everything happens in the according
to the laws of mechanics in other words
it is contrasted with the view known as
teimi ology te l EO l o gy teleology is
the idea that purpose is operative
somewhere in the universe now two
neurologists do not agree among
themselves where a religious ta âlâ just
will say the universe as a whole has a
purpose and everything has a purpose a
more naturalistic type of ta âlâ just
will say no only certain parts of the
universe has a purpose for instance only
living creatures or only conscious
creatures or conceivably only just human
beings are governed by purpose but in
any event the mechanist deny purpose on
any level anywhere there simply is no
such thing purposeful behavior is a myth
that is the essence of the meaning of
the metaphysics of mechanistic
materialism and these are the first
mechanistic materialists in history now
since this is put forth as in
metaphysics it encompasses everything
and therefore including math and as I've
just indicated it follows therefore that
man is governed by strict rigid
determinism determinism is implied by
materialism because of course there's no
mind to make any choices and it's
implied by mechanism since everything
happens according to the laws of
mechanics so there are double
determinists they are the first Orthodox
systematic principled self conscious
determinists in philosophic history
now if you ask them all but don't you
believe in any such thing as a mind or a
soul they say oh yes we believe in a
soul like the soul is made of soul atoms
and it's the presence of those
particular atoms that give rise to life
and consciousness I might mention they
also believed in God's apparently
because people dreamed of God's and at
this primitive time they thought of
something appears to you in a dream it
must have some counterpart in reality
but the gods they insisted were also
made of atoms
they eventually perished the same way
human beings did they had no divine
characteristics they were indifferent to
men and at a certain point they are
various at UM atoms simply split up and
went off in new combinations and that
was the end of the God so for practical
purposes atom mists are atheists
although you will find that they
believed in gods of an utterly
unreligious and insignificant kind now
that the soul atoms I stress are
completely physical on this philosophy
you could have a good handful of soul
soul atoms are fine round smooth
polished mobile they said they are
diffused throughout the world when a
cluster of them enter a combination of
grosser atoms and start quivering then
you have a living or if it's
appropriately organized a conscious
entity consciousness is nothing but a
quivering of the soul atoms periodically
you have a slight deficiency of them if
you have them exit that called going to
sleep sometimes there's a sudden exodus
during the day that's fainting and in a
certain point all of them leave
permanently that's dying of course there
is no such thing as immortality on this
philosophy death is disintegration after
which there is no you left at all your
various atomic constituents wander off
according to the laws of mechanics to
take part in new combinations and you
are obliterated and that's the end since
you are simply the combination so much
for the metaphysics of the atomists
what about their epistemology well I'll
mention only one point here namely their
attitude to the senses you remember that
Heraclitus thought the senses were
invalid and distinguish between reality
and appearance and so on his own
grounded parmenides and the Potala ins
the senses deceive us well
the atom has hold the identical view
they hold that you cannot rely on the
senses why well judging by the senses it
appears that things have colors nothing
seems clearer to me then that this
tablecloth is green and yet in reality
we know if this theory is correct there
are no colors green is a subjective
effect on me nothing seems clearer then
that this feels cool and yet do we know
that there are no temperatures in
reality nothing seems clearer than that
I'm hearing a sound now namely my own
voice but there are no sounds and there
are no taste so there are no textures
all there is a size shape and so on
therefore the senses are deceptive now
Democritus uses the terms the term
Convention to copy that from the surface
school to stand for anything which is a
product of man's subjective Constitution
as against the actual facts of reality
the Greeks frequently contrast and what
what came from convention and what came
from nature or reality and using that
terminology Democritus says in a famous
quotation quote by convention sweet is
sweet
by convention bitter is bitter by
convention hot is hot by convention cold
is cold by convention color is color but
in reality there are atoms in the void
that is the objects of sins are supposed
to be real and it is customary to regard
them as such but in truth they are not
only the atoms and the void are real
unquote so the atomists subscribe to the
same dichotomy between reality known by
reason and appearance known by the
senses so they simply carry out the same
thing that we've seen in many other
cases and they too therefore are
philosophically rationalists
now those of you who know any modern
philosophy well know that this
distinction of the atomists between what
they call qualities and quantities
although it never went anywhere in the
ancient and medieval world was picked up
at the time of the Renaissance while
almost all the influential scientists
and philosophers it was picked up by and
accepted by Galileo Descartes Spinoza
Leibniz lock and lock gave it its modern
name he called it instead of calling it
qualities versus quantities he called it
the primary versus the secondary
qualities the primary being the
quantities the secondary being the
subjective effects on us
in his view and it was also by all these
philosophers made the basis for
invalidating the senses so we're going
to encounter at a game its sources the
Greek atomist and its enormous li
influential when we get to modern
philosophy I'm going to leave it for now
it's a complex issue to untangle what is
wrong with it there are several
different factors involved and I want to
present the objective is view on this
question at a time when you will be
eager to know the answer if you're not
already because you will see the catice
catastrophes that derive in the modern
world from this distinction but I
suggest that you keep a list of issues I
have promised to present the objective
is view on by the end of the course the
number one is what is wrong with the
distinction between primary and
secondary qualities I do want to make
one final comment before we leave
atomism however about its metaphysics do
not be misled by the primitive idea of
atoms here because in more sophisticated
forms this theory is enormous ly common
today it's all over the place
particularly among psychologists who are
desperate to be regarded as scientific
and who regard that as requiring that
they be materialists perhaps the arch
example is BF Skinner but there are many
many others today of course they don't
talk about soul atoms but they talk what
they what they agree with you
relation to the atomists is the view
that we can explain all human behavior
without reference to mind or
consciousness we can simply do without
consciousness write it off as just the
workings of matter and then of course
they all disagree among themselves
whether the relevant parts of matter are
genes or electric charges our s our
stimulus response connections or
reflexes or super reflexes etc and so on
but that is all irrelevant
philosophically it's merely subtler
forms of the democraty in theory
philosophically however it is identical
to Democritus scientifically is more
sophisticated but philosophically it's
identical now as for what is wrong with
mechanistic materialism as a philosophy
I'm going to have to refer you to some
readings if you're interested I'd refer
you first to miss rands article on
Skinner in the iron round letter you can
look at a book by WT Jones history of
Western philosophy Volume one which has
a chapter on atom ISM which presents
many of the criticisms that are
applicable to it I could recommend a
book by brand Blanchard called the
nature of thought which has a very good
chapter attacking and dissecting
behaviorism behaviorism being simply the
name of mechanistic materialism as
applied to modern psychology and I might
also recommend a book by JB Pratt called
matter and spirit which has many many
things wrong with it but also has many
many good points attacking materialism
now as a theory of physics not
metaphysics but physics mechanistic
materialism was a brilliant idea and in
fact modern science began when somebody
got the idea of combining Democritus
with Pythagoras that isn't looking for
mechanistic laws which were
mathematically formulated but they
didn't get that till the Renaissance as
we'll see when we get there but as a
metaphysics
it is completely invalid because it
denies the existence of mind and as such
it's immediately self refuting as its
opponents have pointed out from
antiquity to the present day if there's
no such thing as a mind capable of
observing evidence and reasoning
according to the laws of logic then
every man's conclusions expect Express
nothing but blind mechanistic reactions
each man is then a machine he's a
physical puppet guided by the laws of
motion his conclusions are dictated by
factors such as the density of his
tongue the viscosity of his saliva the
charge is coursing through his nervous
system etc he's a little bigger ball
system in effect rattling and quivering
by mechanistic necessity no one on this
philosophy therefore could ever claim to
be guided by logic by reason by evidence
because there's no mind to grasp to
think to relate the evidence how then is
anyone to decide which of all the
conflicting positions on all the
different subjects is true our situation
is this you rattle the way you have to
rattle and I quivered the way I have to
quiver and that's it no one can say his
position is knowledge simply that that's
the way he has to quiver in other words
materialism entails skepticism and in
that respect is self refuting you
couldn't even know that materialism was
true if you didn't have a mind to
acquire knowledge now there are many
other objections and you can consult the
book the books that I mentioned and if
you wish I will be very happy in the
question period to expound at some
length three or four random further
objections to materialism if you want an
arsenal of objections but I'll wait for
to be asked in the question period if
you want
please give some additional argument
against mechanistic materialism the
first question to ask is what is the
argument in favor of materialism what is
to defend that now if you take an
unprejudiced view of reality
you truly are going to go by observation
you'll observe that there's an external
world in an internal world you have
direct awareness of matter on the
outside and of consciousness in your own
head now the standard materialist the
low-grade materials will say and the
low-grade can of course have chairs at
Harvard standard materialists will say I
don't know what you're talking about
when you talk about consciousness or
mind I can't taste it I can't feel it
I can't weigh it I can't detect it now I
can crack open your brayer head and
stick my fingers in your brain that's
good solid physical I can have a brain
sandwich but I can't find any mind say
and therefore it's a myth now that
argument in actual fact is fantastic
what a consists of doing is setting up
the characteristics of matter as the
criterion of reality and then saying
this is mine doesn't have those
characteristics it isn't real well if
that method of reasoning were valid you
could do exactly the same thing in
Reverse you can make a list of all the
things that matter doesn't have now for
instance you can't psychoanalyze
electrons or matter you can discuss
their motivation you can discuss its
feelings and sensations as premises etc
now suppose I were to say since you
can't do any of this with matter
obviously matter doesn't exist only
might your immediate answer would be how
can you take characteristics of
consciousness and arbitrarily say all of
reality must fulfill it when there's
obviously two kinds of things now the
same principle applies equally to matter
then of course the materials will come
back and he'll say yeah but you can't
define conscious of all you can do is
give synonyms you can say consciousness
is awareness so or list its properties
but you can't say what
to which the answer is in exactly that
same way you're in that position with
regard to matter you can give synonyms
you can say its material its physical
its extended but you cannot define it in
terms of other concepts any more than
you can consciousness all definitions
presuppose some cognitive primaries
which are the basic categories in terms
of which you define everything else but
which themselves cannot be reduced back
further in effect the axioms of
definition and there is every reason to
a hold that consciousness as a
phenomenon is simply descriptively
different from matter and consequently
that you cannot do any more than say if
you want to know what I mean by
consciousness your point
austan simply the same way you do with
matter or with green for that matter now
how would you communicate green to
someone who was didn't know you'd have
to point to several instances to say
that's green that's what's called an
Austen some definition of the definition
by pointing and it's the way all
primaries are defined how would you
define existence same thing says
everything exists you can't distinguish
existence from anything else the only
way you define existence is just wave
your arm and say it's bad covering
everything and the same principle is
applicable to consciousness not that it
covers everything but that you grasp it
by direct introspection now I remind you
of the crucial point that we have to
distinguish what philosophy can do and
what science can do i and objectivism
put forth no theories on the ultimate
relationship between matter as we now
know it in a consciousness it might be
the case I say it might be simply that
I'm not ruling this out that
consciousness is a phenomenon which
results from a certain enormous
complexity of organization of matter and
in that sense as a derivative phenomena
it might be the case that there is
simply irreducibly consciousness and
matter as two distinct phenomena which
in some form always exist and combine in
certain ways under
pre-conditions it might be the case that
there is a third or a tenth phenomena
that we yet do not know of which matter
is one product and consciousness is
another or one form in another some
world stuff has yet outside our
knowledge some type of energy I don't
know nobody knows and nobody has any
business speculating in the state of our
present knowledge normal philosophy have
any means of answering this question
that'll be a question to be answered by
the appropriate scientific discoveries
in physics biology psychology
I don't prejudge those questions I
simply say on philosophic grounds you
cannot get away from the following one
there is consciousness which is not
reducible to matter as we now understand
the phenomenon of matter it has its own
characteristics and its own method of
being known and it is as a real a
phenomenon as external physical matter
to the conclusions of consciousness are
efficacious they have effects on the
actual behavior of conscious entities
three consciousness is in the human case
volitional now the proof of these of
course these latter points assume you
know from objective as literature I
won't get into them those are the points
on the mind-body question which are
philosophically untouchable now the
ultimate physical or metaphysical inter
relations of the two I don't know and it
makes no difference
philosophically it makes no difference
now pursuing materialism for a moment it
comes in two varieties one is called
reductive materialism and the other is
called epiphenomenalism reductive
materialism is the crudest type that's
the type you know that says thinking is
nothing but a quivering of the brain
cells love is a squirting of glandular
juices etc now this is a crude confusion
of necessary condition and identity
maybe it's true that certain glands have
to squirt before you can experience love
that does not mean that love is
it's necessary condition obviously it
has to be something different from the
thing which gives rise to it or is
presupposed by now as one philosopher
put it you cannot argue with a man who
says love is is a squirting of juices
that's distinct from love is caused by
or presupposes but love literally is
because he said to argue against a
position what you try and do is show
that it leads to an absurdity but if
somebody comes in the room and utters an
absurdity as his formal position there
is nothing you can sing if somebody
comes in and says my view is that
elephants are peaches now do something
now that's reductive materialism now the
more serious form of materialism as
epiphenomenalism and that is the view
that there is such a thing as mind which
is distinct from matter only it's
completely helpless byproduct of the
matter it is incapable of initiating any
action
it's a passively resultant of physical
processes it's completely determined
completely purposeless sort of like a
useless waste product that nature gives
off now the problems with this are all
of the problems that we indicated and
even more if mind is metaphysically
helpless and has no efficacy or effect
then the theory is right away self
refuting the advocates of it are
mindless by their own statement or
rather they have a useless mind that has
no offense and therefore their mind had
nothing to do with the motion of their
hands or their tongues as they were busy
preparing their theory of course insofar
as there's no mind there's no
possibility of choice and therefore
materials necessarily implies
determinism and that is you must know
from objective as literature's the early
self refuting the determinist can know
anything including that he's determined
and insofar as it implies a denial of
purpose it's also self refuting that
means there's no way in principle of
distinguishing between a man whose hand
shakes because of palsy and a man whose
hand shake
because he wants to express a certain
thought because there's no such thing as
wanting to express everything that
happens is purposeless it simply
mechanistically caused well if that's
the case no one has a right to expect
you to consider the results of his palsy
shaking now beyond all of these there is
a simple fact and it's often very
helpful to appeal the facts in
philosophy it is not a common practice
but it's a very it's a very desirable
one now I put it to you that you cannot
look at the actual facts of the world
and entertain for a moment the idea that
ideas mental phenomena have no effects
which is the essence of materials you
could not account for the facts of human
behavior the obvious facts that their
behavior is dictated by their ideas
including their value judgments that
when they change their values they
change their action that they go to
psychotherapists in order to change
their mental processes in order
therefore to act differently that's the
only way they can do it but knowledge is
of vital necessity without which a man
cannot cross the street or satisfy the
most minimal hunger pains and that
knowledge means something meant the
acquisition of awareness of ideas of
information you could not begin to make
sense of human history from the
Industrial Revolution through the self
flagellation of the worst many evil
saint on mechanistic materialist grounds
at some how in some funny way the atom
started to quiver and Saint Francis went
out and plunged himself in a snow heap
every time he had a sexual desire I mean
it's just bizarre
now I don't want to kill the whole
period on that but I regard mechanistic
materialism as simply senseless I think
Plato's philosophy is infinitely more
sophisticated more thoughtful and more
much better reasoned it's wrong but I
take Plato over materialist any day is
mechanism valid in physics part of the
same question well if all you mean by
mechanism is the denial of teleology as
applied to inanimate nature then I would
say yes in other words objectivism does
not subscribe to the idea that the
inanimate world is animated by purpose
it holds that purpose is coextensive
with consciousness and is therefore
possible at most to the animals and of
course primarily in the form of a
conceptually directed goal to men in
this broad respect objectivism would
subscribe to mechanism in physics
however as soon as you become more
specific than that and you mean by
mechanism Galileo's laws or Newton's
laws or Einsteins laws or whichever
particular scientist is going to tell
you what are the principles by which
matter operates that's a question for
science not for philosophy are there any
non mechanistic materialists or non
materialistic mechanist well let's take
it one at a time are there any non
mechanistic materials yes the Marxists
the Marxists are dialectic materials not
mechanistic materials as materialists
they agree that reality is essentially
matter in motion but as dialectic
advocates they do not believe that the
laws controlling the development of
matter are simply too good old-fashioned
laws of Galilean mechanics or Newtonian
mechanics they believe that the laws
controlling the entire world are Hegel's
dialectic try
something happens and then the opposite
and then the two blend which gives rise
to a new opposite and so on and the
reality waltzes to destiny that's a very
different type of materialism it's not
mechanistic materials are they're non
materialistic mechanist I can't imagine
what they would consist of if mechanism
is the view that everything operates
according to the laws of mechanics I
don't know what else would obey the laws
of mechanics other than material things
and if everything occupies that way
presumably then everything is material
so I can't imagine it in Reverse is it
within the province of philosophy to
determine the status of consciousness
that is whether it is a separate
substance or entity or a state or
attribute or action of certain living
entities if this is a philosophic
question what is the answer the only
respect in which this is a philosophic
question is consciousness must in some
respect have at least one attribute of
an entity that is it must be capable of
initiating action it must be capable of
that if we are to preserve the
philosophic principle of the efficacy of
consciousness and its ability to direct
human behavior or animal aid and that
one respect it must be akin to an entity
but what its exact status is and its
exact relation on anything further than
that philosophy has nothing to say